Releases/sle/2023 10 (#168)
ni/install-systemlink-enterprise: release-notes/2023-10/README.md

# SystemLink Enterprise 2023-10 Release Notes

The 2023-10 release for SystemLink Enterprise has been published to <https://downloads.artifacts.ni.com>. This update includes new features, bug fixes, and security updates. Work with your account representative to obtain credentials to access these artifacts. If you are not upgrading from the previous release, refer to past release notes to ensure you have addressed all required configuration changes.

## New Features and Behavior changes

- You can view the current and historical values of tags in dashboards.
- Data tables have improved reliability and scalability and can support thousands of concurrent writers.

> - Systems data can be visualized in dashboards.

Reviewer: Try to stick to the "You can" construction for consistancy

- You can change the version of a package installed on a managed system.
- You can view all tracked assets on the Assets page
- You can add comments to a test result
- You can connect to external MongoDB instances.

>     - This is a breaking change. Refer to **Helm Chart Breaking Changes** for detail on how to opt-out of this capability or migrate to a new MongoDB instance.

Reviewer: This is just a continuation of a thought. It doesn't need to be a sub-bullet

- New Test Analytics privilege category is available.
    - The Test Analytics privilege category has been added, and includes the Query Measurements privilege. This privilege is not currently functional and is being added in support of features that will release in a future version.

## Upgrading from the release 2023-09 to the release 2023-10

> - This release upgrade Redis from 7.0 to 7.2. This is a breaking change. It is necessary to upgrade the Redis cluster. Helm will not perform this upgrade automatically.

Reviewer: Avoid passive voice

> - This release upgrade Redis from 7.0 to 7.2. This is a breaking change. It is necessary to upgrade the Redis cluster. Helm will not perform this upgrade automatically.

Reviewer: Why is this a bulleted item? Same question for other bullets that are not steps or part of a list.

Reviewer 2: I have made this in a dedicated section now.

> - Option #1

Reviewer: Why would users choose one option over the other?

Reviewer 2: @JD-Robertson Any thoughts on this? Do we need to add reasoning/context for users to pick one option over another?

Reviewer 3: These should not be presented as two options. We should recommend the first option. If that fails, the user will need to reset the redis deployment as described in Option 2 and in the separate how to document in this PR.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @JD-Robertson . I updated the section based on your inputs

    1. Set `webserver.redis-cluster.redis.update-strategy.type = OnDelete`
    1. Run the Helm command to upgrade your deployment to this release.
    1. Run `kubectl -n <namespace> delete pods <release>-webserver-redis-0 <release>-webserver-redis-1 release>-webserver-redis-2 <release>-webserver-redis-3 <release>-webserver-redis-4 <release>-webserver-redis-5`. The pods of the stateful set will be deleted and will be automatically recreated.
    1. Remove the override of the Redis update-strategy from the configuration. You can re-deploy to apply this change but it is not required.
- Option #2
    1. Prior to upgrade, run: `kubectl -n <namespace> delete statefulset <release>-webserver-redis`

>     1. This will delete the redis cluster, preventing UI access to the application.

Reviewer: This is a note, not a step

    1. Run the Helm command to upgrade your deployment to this release. The Redis cluster will be recreated and deployed in parallel.
- Once upgraded, Redis storage will be incompatible with older versions of the software. If it is necessary to downgrade to an older version of SystemLink Enterprise, you must perform a hard reset on the redis cluster. These steps are not required if you are only upgrading to the latest release.
    - Refer to [Perform-a-hard-reset-on-the-redis-cluster.md](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/tree/2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/Perform-a-hard-reset-on-the-redis-cluster.md) for steps to reset Redis.

## Helm Chart Breaking Changes

- Support for single external MongoDB instance
    - The systemlink Helm chart now supports an external MongoDB instance
    - If you have an existing installation of SLE you should set `global.mongodb.install` to `true` in order to maintain the same behavior in future versions of the Helm chart.

>     - If you desire to use a single external MongoDB instance:

Reviewer: Word choice: "desire" is weirdly loaded. Use "want" instead

    - Customers can use per-service user/password combinations ("mongodb+srv://`<username>`:`<password>`@host/`<database>`") (<> will be replaced during per-service Helm install/upgrade)
- CRITICAL - The systemlink Helm chart defaults to connect to an external MongoDB instance
    - If you have an existing installation of SLE you MUST etiher set `global.mongodb.install` to `true` or migrate your existing data to an external MongoDB instance and provide the connection string in `global.mongodb.connection_string`
- dataframeservice
    - dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimitMegabytes was renamed to dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimit. It now accepts units in "MiB" (Mebibytes, 1024 KiB) or in "MB" (Megabytes, 1000 KB). [https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/pull/165]
- taghistorian
    - The TagHistorian service was added as part of the top level helm chart of SystemLink Enterprise. The service enables the users to see historical values for their tags.
    - Before running the service, please configure the values according to the instructions from the helm chart.

>     - The service requires a `continuationTokenEncryptionKey` to be configured. When creating the `continuationTokenEncryptionKey`, use a 32-byte cryptographically random value which is base64 encoded.

Reviewer 4: @priya-ni , I've added this link for taghistorian > continuationTokenEncryptionKey

We'll need to replace the link so it uses the tag for the 2023-10 release.

>     - The service requires a `continuationTokenEncryptionKey` to be configured. When creating the `continuationTokenEncryptionKey`, use a 32-byte cryptographically random value which is base64 encoded.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - You must configure the secrets for MongoDB required by this service.
        - [View this configuration](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/blob/2023-10/getting-started/templates/systemlink-secrets.yaml#L549)
    - The service requires a `continuationTokenEncryptionKey` to be configured. When creating the `continuationTokenEncryptionKey`, use a 32-byte cryptographically random value which is base64 encoded.
```

## Upgrade Considerations

- DataFrame Service Kafka dependency has been removed
    - The DataFrame Service now uses a more efficient method for writing data to new tables, replacing Kafka. The DataFrame Service will still use Kafka for data ingestion for tables created before the 2023-10 release, while tables created after upgrading to the 2023-10 release will have data written directly to S3 storage. This changes leads to greatly reduced resource utilization.
    - After upgrading to the 2023-10 release, you can safely remove Kafka from your cluster once all pre-upgrade tables are set to readonly. Please note that disabling Kafka may lead to data loss if pre-upgrade tables are not readonly, because any buffered data may not get written to storage.
    - Refer to [Remove-Kafka-from-the-cluster.md](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/tree/2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/Remove-Kafka-from-the-cluster.md) for detailed instructions.
- DataFrame Service Dremio refresh interval
    - The Dremio data set refresh job interval was increased from 2 minutes to 1 hour. This reduces overall load on Dremio.

>     - Customers are not required to uptake this change, but doing so will result in lower load and lower resource utilization.

Reviewer 6: Customers are required to uptake this change. This change prevents Dremio's volumes from filling up, which can get it into a bad state.

Reviewer 2: Updated based on input

> <!-- This file should be renamed to README.md and placed in the directory for the release. -->

Reviewer 7: We can remove the comment

# SystemLink Enterprise release 2023-10 Release Notes

The 2023-10 release bundle for SystemLink Enterprise has been published to <https://downloads.artifacts.ni.com>. This update includes new features, bug fixes, and security updates. Work with your account representative to obtain credentials to access these artifacts. If you are not upgrading from the previous release, refer to past release notes to ensure you have addressed all required configuration changes.

## Upgrading from the release 2023-09 to the release 2023-10

<!-- Optional section to include comments and instructions needed to successfully upgrade from the previous release to the current release. If the only changes needed are already captured in Helm Chart Breaking Changes, this section is not needed. -->

> ## New Features and Behavior changes

Reviewer 7: This section should be a summary of the changes and links to the documents or configuration (if available/necessary). See past release notes for examples. 

The upgrade instructions that are detailed here should be in the **Upgrade Considerartions** section. If the instructions are long we should consider having them in their own document and referencing them.

Reviewer 4: @prestwick ,

I kept this under New Features and Behavior Changes:
- testinsightsui 0.6.112: Comments service was added to top level helm chart in previous release 2023-09. In this release, feature flag is removed and comments tab will be visible in result details page and user can add/view/edit/delete comments under a test result.
- The Test Analytics privilege category has been added, and includes the Query Measurements privilege. This privilege is not currently functional and is being added in support of features that will release in a future version.

I moved these to section `Upgrade from the release 2023-09 to the release 2023-10':
- webserver 0.13.4: Upgraded Redis dependency from 7.0 to 7.2. This is a breaking change. It is necessary to upgrade the entire cluster in parallel, which is not something Kubernetes will do automatically.

I moved these to section 'Upgrade Considerations':
- dataframeservice 0.14.49: The Dremio data set refresh job interval was increased from 2 minutes to 1 hour....Customers are not required to uptake this change, but doing so will...
- dataframeservice 0.14.49: The DataFrame Service now uses a more efficient method for writing data to new tables, replacing Kafka...
AND I'm going to put this long info as a separate .md file.

Reviewer 4: @prestwick , I've additionally moved the steps for Kafka removal to this .md file:
- https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/blob/sle-release-notes-2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/Remove-Kafka-from-the-cluster.md

Setting this as Resolved.

- webserver 0.13.4
    - Upgraded Redis dependency from 7.0 to 7.2. This is a breaking change. It is necessary to upgrade the entire cluster in parallel, which is not something Kubernetes will do automatically.
    - Option #1: Set webserver.redis-cluster.redis.update-strategy.type = OnDelete

>         - Run the upgrade deployment

Reviewer 7: These steps by steps instructions should use order rather than unordered lists.

>         - Run kubectl -n <`namespace`> delete pods <`release`>-webserver-redis-0 <`release`>-webserver-redis-1 <`release`>-webserver-redis-2 <`release`>-webserver-redis-3 <`release`>-webserver-redis-4 <`release`>-webserver-redis-5

Reviewer 7: The entire example CLI command should be in a `code` block

        - Remove the overide of the redis update-strategy from the configuration. You can re-deploy to apply this change but it is not required.
    - Option #2: Prior to upgrade, run: kubectl -n <`namespace`> delete statefulset <`release`>-webserver-redis
        - This will delete the redis cluster, preventing UI access to the application.
        - Now run the upgrade deployment. The redis cluster will be recreated and deployed in parallel.
    - Once upgraded, Redis storage will be incompatibile with older versions of the software. If it is necessary to downgrade to an older version, you must perform a hard reset on the redis cluster:
        - [Perform-a-hard-reset-on-the-redis-cluster.md](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/tree/2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/Perform-a-hard-reset-on-the-redis-cluster.md)
- dataframeservice 0.14.14
    - The Dremio data set refresh job interval was increased from 2 minutes to 1 hour. This reduces overall load on Dremio.
    - Customers are not required to uptake this change, but doing so will be beneficial as the net result in load reduction.

>     - The following steps cover what the customer needs to do:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    - Refer to [How-to-reset-Dremio.md](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/tree/2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/How-to-reset-Dremio.md) to uptake this change.
```

>         - [How-to-reset-Dremio.md](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/tree/2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/How-to-reset-Dremio.md)

Reviewer 7: This bullet can be removed if you take my previous suggestion.

> - dataframeservice 0.14.39

Reviewer 7: Something isn't right here. We can't both be shipping DFS 0.14.4 and 0.14.39.

Reviewer 4: The version we ship is 0.14.49, so I put that instead; the earlier versions are internal versions when changes were made but which are older versions that 0.14.49 that we ship

    - The DataFrame Service now uses a more efficient method for writing data to new tables, replacing Kafka. The DataFrame Service will still use Kafka for data ingestion for tables created before the 2023-10 release, while tables created after upgrading to the 2023-10 release will have data written directly to S3 storage.
    - After upgrading to the 2023-10 release, you can safely remove Kafka from your cluster once all pre-upgrade tables are set to readonly. Please note that disabling Kafka may lead to data loss if pre-upgrade tables are not readonly, because any buffered data may not get written to storage.

>     - To remove Kafka from the cluster:

Reviewer 7: These  steps are long enough that this should be pulled into its own document and referenced here.

Reviewer 4: Moved the steps to this file and linked to it from the release notes: 
- https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/blob/sle-release-notes-2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/Remove-Kafka-from-the-cluster.md

    - Note that appendable tables created prior to the update will continue to consume Kafka resources.
- The Test Analytics privilege category has been added, and includes the Query Measurements privilege. This privilege is not currently functional and is being added in support of features that will release in a future version.
- testinsightsui 0.6.107
    - Comments service was added to top level helm chart in previous release 2023-09. In this release, feature flag is removed and comments tab will be visible in result details page and user can add/view/edit/delete comments under a test result.

## Helm Chart Breaking Changes

- New - mongodb connection string global value override.
    - Customers can specify the user/password directly in the global ("mongodb+srv://user:pass@host/<`database`>") (<> will be replaced during per-service Helm install/upgrade)
    - Customers can use per-service user/password combinations ("mongodb+srv://<`username`>:<`password`>@host/<`database`>") (<> will be replaced during per-service Helm install/upgrade)

> - CRITICAL - The systemlink Helm chart defaults to connect to an external MongoDB instance

Reviewer 7: This should be the first item in this this.

Reviewer 4: @prestwick  , I did move the Critical section to be the first.

Question: I expect the MongoDB helm chart breaking changes need to be applied by GM regardless of the remaining issues we're still troubleshooting during October:
- See this input from Max Brown [Teams link](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/message/19:26ceeb9c81db41fd9f4e2e36c6cfd787@thread.skype/1697460321784?tenantId=87ba1f9a-44cd-43a6-b008-6fdb45a5204e&groupId=41626d4a-3f1f-49e2-abdc-f590be4a329d&parentMessageId=1696009681604&teamName=ASW%20SystemLink&channelName=General&createdTime=1697460321784)
- `single Mongo validation can wait a bit since R&D is still working out some issues in our own clusters`

Reviewer 8: As I mentioned in feedback on [this PR](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/pull/169) we did **not** end up changing the default for the October release. This is no longer critical and GM should not have to make changes related to MongoDB for this release.

Reviewer 8: Why is the wording different than what I see in the [`sle-release-notes-2023-10` branch](https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/tree/sle-release-notes-2023-10/release-notes/2023-10#helm-chart-breaking-changes)?

The wording changes in that branch need to be here as well.

Reviewer 4: Hi @g-m-o-n-e-y , the initial info came from this spreadsheet, as documented per our squads:

[SLE 2023-10_Helm Chart Breaking Changes, Software Behavior Changes (including Priviliges) for the Release Notes - out of September 2023.xlsx](https://nio365.sharepoint.com/:x:/s/ASWSystemLink/EcxeSe4JIQdNqp7FP_x9-AQBh2DR8PGflWDWux43xUPsYA?e=NR8lbz)

This comment shows outdated and if I check the Readme.md in this same branch the content is as you have mentioned above:
- https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/blob/sle-release-notes-2023-10/release-notes/2023-10/README.md

Can we then consider this comment as resolved?

FYI @priya-ni

    - If you have an existing installation of SLE you MUST etiher set `global.mongodb.install` to `true` or migrate your existing data to an external MongoDB instance and provide the connection string in `global.mongodb.connection_string`
- dataframeservice

>     - dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimitMegabytes was renamed to dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimit. It now accepts units in "MiB" (Mebibytes, 1024 KiB) or in "MB" (Megabytes, 1000 KB). [https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/pull/165]

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    - `dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimitMegabytes` has been renamed to `dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimit`. It now accepts units in "MiB" (Mebibytes, 1024 KiB) or in "MB" (Megabytes, 1000 KB). [https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/pull/165]
```

>     - dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimitMegabytes was renamed to dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimit. It now accepts units in "MiB" (Mebibytes, 1024 KiB) or in "MB" (Megabytes, 1000 KB). [https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/pull/165]

Reviewer 7: Rather than link to a PR we should be linking to lines in the values file that show this new configuration. Refer to past release notes to see how this is structured.

Author: @CIakab-NI Please refer to this link https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/blob/4da6c60d63ef48a663e78efd9b393e41b6c40ba4/getting-started/templates/systemlink-values.yaml#L579

Reviewer 4: @priya-ni , I've added a 'View this configuration' bullet that links to the link above, for dataframeservice.requestBodySizeLimit.

We'll need to replace the link so it uses the tag for the 2023-10 release.

Reviewer 4: I'm marking this resolved since @priya-ni has updated the link to include the 2023-10 tag

- taghistorian
    - The TagHistorian service was added as part of the top level helm chart of SystemLink Enterprise. The service enables the users to see historical values for their tags.

>     - Before running the service, please configure the values according to the instructions from the helm chart.

Reviewer 7: We need a reference/link to this configuration. Helm is always capitalized (chart is never capitalized).

Author: @CIakab-NI Please refer this link
https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/blob/4da6c60d63ef48a663e78efd9b393e41b6c40ba4/getting-started/templates/systemlink-secrets.yaml#L549

Reviewer 4: @priya-ni , I've added a 'View this configuration' bullet that links to the link above, for 
- 'Before running the service, please configure the values according to the instructions from the helm chart.'

We'll need to replace the link so it uses the tag for the 2023-10 release.

>     - The service requires a continuationTokenEncryptionKey to be configured. When creating the continuationTokenEncryptionKey, use a 32-byte cryptographically random value which is base64 encoded.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    - The service requires a `continuationTokenEncryptionKey` to be configured. When creating the `continuationTokenEncryptionKey`, use a 32-byte cryptographically random value which is base64 encoded.
```

>     - The service requires a continuationTokenEncryptionKey to be configured. When creating the continuationTokenEncryptionKey, use a 32-byte cryptographically random value which is base64 encoded.

Reviewer 7: We likely can include a reference of where this goes in the secrets file.

Reviewer 4: Continued by Priya, in this comment, so am marking this as Resolved:
- https://github.com/ni/install-systemlink-enterprise/pull/168#discussion_r1360728956

> ## Upgrade Considerations

Reviewer 7: This is where we should be included steps for upgrade instructions or referencing other documents if those instructions are long.

SystemLink Enterprise includes a deployment of the [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/) message bus. Since you cannot skip minor versions when updating RabbitMQ, you may not be able to upgrade directly between versions of the SystemLink Enterprise product. The table below shows the version of the RabbitMQ dependency for each released version of SystemLink Enterprise. Refer to [Updating SystemLink Enterprise](https://www.ni.com/docs/en-US/bundle/systemlink-enterprise/page/updating-systemlink-enterprise.html) for detailed update instructions.

| RabbitMQ Version | First SystemLink Enterprise Version | Last SystemLink Enterprise Version |
|------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| 3.11.x           | 0.12.x                              | 0.15.x                             |
| 3.12.x           | 0.16.x                              | current                            |

Refer to [Updating SystemLink Enterprise](https://www.ni.com/docs/en-US/bundle/systemlink-enterprise/page/updating-systemlink-enterprise.html) for detailed instructions on how to safely upgrade the version of the RabbitMQ dependency.

## Bugs Fixed

> <!-- This section should link to the excel document that list customer facing bugs, fixed in the current release. The URL for the release (tag) should be used. -->

Reviewer 7: This comment should be removed.

dremio-ee:24.1.2

executionsui:0.6.42

filesui:0.7.47

grafana-auth-proxy:20230404.4

grafana-plugins:3.3.0

grafana-rbac-integrator:0.6.10

helium-dataservices:0.5.21

helium-fileingestionservices:0.9.20

helium-salt-master:1.3.18

helium-serviceregistry:0.6.20

helium-taghistoriandataretention:0.1.94

helium-taghistorianservices:0.1.94

helium-userservices:0.6.35

helium-webappservices:0.5.13

helium-webserver:0.13.12

jupyter-notebook-userpod:20230928.21

jupyterui:0.6.36

landingpageui:0.6.45

license:0.6.27

licensesui:0.3.47

nbexec-execution-helpers:20230911.5

nbexec-notebook-runner:20230922.2

nbexecservice:0.7.26

nbparsingservice:0.6.7

ni-grafana:v9.5.8-ed05e1eca2-ni

notification:0.6.19

repository:0.2.16

routineeventtrigger:0.7.6

routineexecutor:0.7.4

routinescheduletrigger:0.7.8

routineservice:0.8.9

routinesui:0.7.30

securityui:0.6.39

session-manager-service:0.7.18

sl-configurable-http-proxy:20230823.1

sl-k8s-hub:20230825.2

smtp:0.6.13

sysmgmtevent:0.7.19

systemsmanagementservice:0.6.23

systemsui:0.7.87

tagsui:0.2.48

testinsightsui:0.6.112

testmonitorservice:0.15.19

userdata:0.6.19

userservice-setup:0.7.3

### Non Container/Chart Artifacts

> There aren't any Non Container/Chart Artifacts.

Reviewer 7: We can remove this section if this is the case.
